Deploy little and often (#462)
UKHomeOffice/engineering-guidance-and-standards: docs/principles/deploy-little-and-often.md

---
layout: principle
order: 1
title: Deploy little and often
date: 2024-09-26
tags:
- Build, release and deploy
- Ways of working
- Deployment
- CI/CD
- Quality

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
related:
  sections:
    - title: Related links
      items:
        - text: Selecting a deployment strategy
          href: /patterns/selecting-a-deployment-strategy/
        - text: Make small changes
          href: /patterns/make-small-changes/
---
```

---
layout: principle
order: 1
title: Deploy little and often
date: 2024-09-26
tags:
- Build, release and deploy
- Ways of working
- Deployment
- CI/CD
- Quality
---

Deploying little and often is the practice of when we have a "completed" change and deploying that through 

> our pipeline stages all the way to production often, no matter the size of the change. This reduces risk, enables the team to fix issues faster and iterate faster, while maintaining high product quality.

Author: Manual line breaks looks to be resolved now

---

## Rationale

> Deploying little and often strategy will enable users to see changes faster and then provide feedback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deploying little and often reduces lead time from change request to release, for both new features and bug fixes. This enables users to see changes faster and provide feedback.
```

The cost of fixing potential issues is also smaller due to the fact that the little and often approach allows us to quickly adapt and release or rollback to a stable state, also

> the smaller the change being pushed out the smaller the chance of merge conflicts.

Reviewer 3: `, also
the smaller the change being pushed out the smaller the chance of merge conflicts.` Can this be a sentence in its own right?

Author: Noted, but the way the text for the rationale is laid out this just a complementary argument to the paragraph, its not like its own bullet point that could be separated IMO, happy to move it to its own line though if we have others agree?

Reviewer 3: I dont mean that to be in a separate para. Just a separate sentence btw.

Author: Updated now

> The cost of fixing potential issues is also smaller due to the fact that the little and often approach allows us to quickly adapt and release or rollback to a stable state, also
> the smaller the change being pushed out the smaller the chance of merge conflicts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cost of fixing issues is smaller as deploying little and often approach allows us to quickly adapt, fix-forward or rollback to a stable state.

The likelihood and impact of merge conflicts is reduced with this approach, as smaller changes are integrated into a project's main branch more regularly. This also allows teams to move closer to achieving [Continuous Integration](https://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html).
```

Author: I am unsure about the second paragraph here, while its a nice point made with a link to content to back the point up, you could very easily integrate into the main branch without deploying a single thing, the implication from that comes more from branching strategy as this principle doesn't currently state you have to deploy from main branch?

Reviewer 2: Agreed the second paragraph is more to do with merging/branching than deployment, and so could fall out of the scope of this principle. I think it was also implied in the original version though:

>also the smaller the change being pushed out the smaller the chance of merge conflicts.

as likelihood of merge conflicts is only reduced with smaller deployments if those changes are also integrated to a shared branch, otherwise many small feature branches could be deployed before they are integrated with each other, pushing potential merge conflicts down the line.

I don't think this point is needed for this principle, but if removing it does that mean removing the end of the original paragraph (quoted above) too if it is stating something similar?

> With this approach it builds confidence in the product to stakeholders by the means of more successful incremental builds, allowing there to be less pressure around a release.
> Big sizeable releases that fail can cause a lot of pain not just for stakeholders but for others such as customers that rely on the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Smaller, incremental deployments build confidence for stakeholders, creating less pressure around a release. Larger, infrequent releases that fail cause additional delays in new features and bug fixes, impacting the project team and users alike.
```

---

## Applications and Implications

> - This principle is reliant on good quality tests which validate the release before it gets to production, therefore tests reinforce the confidence in our builds so that we can deploy often

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This principle is reliant on good quality, automated tests which validate the release before it gets to production. These tests reinforce confidence in our builds so that we can deploy often
```

Author: The explicit wording of "automated" I am unsure about, I think it might be better to add to the end of the point something like "you can achieve good quality testing through automated tests for example"

Reviewer 2: Are you unsure about stating that the principle needs automated tests because manual testing could equally cover the required validation of each change?

If so, I think that is possible, but far from ideal in that if you have zero automated tests, you either need to manually test every requirement for every release, which will significantly impact a team's ability to deploy often; or, you don't cover all scenarios due to time constraints, which will affect confidence in each change and increase the likelihood of bugs being introduced. For those reasons I would say it's mandatory for this principle to be used effectively in any non-trivial project.

If we did want a softer statement of this, however, we could add it to the end as you say. Maybe with something like

```suggestion
- This principle is reliant on good quality tests which validate the release before it gets to production. These tests reinforce the confidence in our builds so that we can deploy often. Adding automated test coverage will greatly improve a team's likelihood of achieving this principle.
```

- We have CI/CD pipelines that are quick and efficient, automating repetitive tasks so that we can deploy little and often

> - We must be aware of downstream users, fixing forward is good which is what this principle implies but not every aspect of your prohect may be using this principle and therefore not as flexible

Reviewer 3: `prohect ` typo?

> - We must be aware of downstream users, fixing forward is good which is what this principle implies but not every aspect of your project may be using this principle and therefore not as flexible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We must be aware of how frequent releases affect users, and consider whether it is applicable in each use case. For example, where a breaking change is introduced, or an in-progress operation would be affected
```

> - As we will be deploying more often there is the option to use feature flags as a way to better safeguard with new features continually coming through to production 

Reviewer 3: `the option to use feature flags` Should we change "the option" to "an option"?

Author: does "an" option in this sentence imply we already have something built, that could just be used? Whereas "the" implies its a possibility to look at?

Reviewer 3: ah I might have understood that otherwise. Leave as is then.

> - As we will be deploying more often there is the option to use feature flags as a way to better safeguard with new features continually coming through to production 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Deployment strategies should be considered where appropriate. For example, feature flags can be used to allow deployments to occur without releasing new functionality to all users at once. See [Selecting a deployment strategy](/patterns/selecting-a-deployment-strategy/) for more detail
```
